# How to make the most of your conference experience

This page has some tips for undergraduate researchers attending, or presenting
at, an academic conference.

## General Conference

Here are some tips for attending any conference, even if you're not presenting
anything.

### Plan ahead

Conferences can have lots of events: talks, poster sessions, panels, social
events, etc.

It's helpful to look at the program a few days in advance and decide what you
might want to go to.

Personally, I have a "tentative" calendar that I add different events to. I then
choose events somewhat spontaneously. For example, if I see someone I haven't
seen in awhile, I might skip a talk to chat with them, or go with them to a
different interesting talk.

But if all else fails, I can look at my calendar and pick something to do.

### Don't just go to talks

Most of a conference's time is usually scheduled for research talks. That's what
people are here to "confer" about, after all.

But you can read the paper and get a good chunk of what you would in the talk.
Even for asking questions, you could probably email the author.

What you can't easily do outside of a conference is meet people in the field and
get to know them. This might be other students, professors doing work you're
interested in, or even potential employers.

Personally, I now try to only attend talks for papers where I'm skeptical of the
results or think there might be some spicy discussion. Other than that, I
usually try to find people to talk to.

### Be prepared to talk about your research work and interests

Along with your name and institution, one of the first questions you can expect
to be asked is, "What do you work on?"

It's typically good to have at least a 30-second introduction of your research.
I usually start with my biggest area of interest, describing the high-level
problems we're studying and why they're important, and then talking about a few
other topics I'm interested in.

If you have the time, it can also be helpful to prepare a longer introduction
(90 seconds) of your research for those who know the area well or want more
details. Here, I usually also talk about the major approaches to our research
(e.g., ideas we're building on, specific software libraries/technologies,
methods) and relevant past projects I've done.

The person might ask questions about your work. This is usually a good thing
since they're engaging with your ideas. If a question comes across as
confrontational, try not to take it personally - most people are just
well-intentioned and trying to understand (and give feedback on) your research.

### Ask your advisor for introductions

It may seem daunting to approach other researchers and introduce yourself,
especially if you're a bit nervous about how to talk about research.

You can (and should) ask your advisor to introduce you if you're interested.
This is part of their job, and it can really help to hear someone else explain
your work to other researchers in the field.

### It's okay to do non-work things

Your first few conferences may feel overwhelming. ASEE (the big North American
conference in engineering education) is _enormous_, with tons of things going on
at any given time.

If it's too much, you should feel free to take a break, explore the city, or
meet up with others outside of the conference venue.

The only thing I wouldn't recommend doing is spending a majority of the day in
your hotel room not doing anything. A bit of email/calls/etc. is fine, but too
much and you'll miss out on the unique opportunities the conference can offer
you.

## Presenting a Poster

If you're presenting a poster, you'll typically have a session of 1-2 hours to
stand by your poster and discuss your work with others. Here are some tips for
presenting a poster at a conference.

### Treat the poster as a summary

The point of a poster is **not** to communicate everything about your project in
visual form. A poster should _summarize_ the most important takeaways of your
work and show just enough detail of your work to support those takeaways.

Be strict about what you do and don't include in your poster. When deciding
whether to include a detail or not, ask yourself:

- How much more will the viewer understand your work with this detail?
- How much effort will it take for the viewer to read and digest this
  information?

One thing you can do is go over your idea with someone you know that isn't too
familiar with the area. Start by summarizing your idea to them, and only add in
the details that they ask about in the first 2 minutes or so.

### Make it easy to get the key takeaways

Most people will just walk by your poster and briefly glance at it, if at all.
They'll probably see the title, top-level headings, and visuals. If that
interests them, they'll look more closely.

Because of this, you should make it easy to get those takeaways even for viewers
who are just passing by. Here's an example:

[Poster with large text takeaway at the top](static/poster_example.jpg)

**Don't** just put dense blocks of text. For projects where data visualization
is appropriate, make sure that the visualizations have enough detail and large
enough font.

### Link to further reading

If there's more about your work to talk about, provide a link where people can
read more. At a minimum, consider adding a link to the poster PDF itself.

It's best to include **both** a QR code and a short URL. This makes it easy for
people to get the link even if their phone is dead, etc.

### Engage your audience

As people walk by, some might stop to read your poster. Give them a few seconds
to quickly digest the content, then go over and say that you'd be happy to tell
them more about the work or answer questions if they'd like.

They might not talk more with you, but your chances of engaging viewers in a
discussion is significantly lower if you just politely watch them reading your
poster.

## Giving a Talk

If you're giving a talk, you'll probably get 10-20 minutes to talk through a
research paper.

### Advertise your paper

The talk shouldn't be a summary of your paper. The talk is an advertisement for
your paper. The goal of the talk is to get your audience excited to read your
paper.

Design your talk so that it's engaging and intuitive: get them thinking about
questions, highlight key phrases and ideas, use visuals, and aim at
communicating an intuitive feel for your idea.

### Focus on the core idea

Advertising your paper **does not** mean that you should an overview of the
entire paper.

Instead, you should find the most important key takeaway of the paper (the
"technical meat" of the paper), and spend time digging into it.

Give concrete examples to work with, and be sure to highlight the most important
idea ("If you remember nothing else, remember this: ...").

Don't be afraid to tell the audience, "You can check out the paper for more
details on this part." But remember that they may ask questions, so you still
need to know the content of your paper very well, even if you don't present it.

### Memorize the first 1-2 minutes of your talk

Many people get nervous when starting a talk. Tripping over words or losing your
train of thought in the first few minutes can cause a lot of people to
disengage.

I find that it's helpful to write out and memorize the first minute or two of my
talks. That way, I can be on autopilot long enough to get over my initial
nervousness.

### Stick to the time limit

Practice until you're confident that you can stay within the time limit. Many
talks run over time, and lots of people will start to disengage as you pass the
time limit. Some people jump between talks in different rooms and might leave at
a certain time no matter what.

Do not go over time. This leaves enough time for questions and makes sure that
people stay engaged for your full talk.

## Talk to me if you have more questions or want more examples

Feel free to contact me if you have more questions! I'm also happy to provide
you with example posters/slides on request.

## Resources

- Penn State's examples of good and bad posters: https://cpb-us-e1.wpmucdn.com/sites.psu.edu/dist/a/36309/files/2016/04/Posters-The-Good-and-the-Bad.pdf
- Colin Purrington's example of a bad poster: https://colinpurrington.com/2012/02/example-of-bad-scientific-poster/
- Colin Purrington's post on designing posters: https://colinpurrington.com/tips/poster-design/
- Simon Peyton Jones's page on giving a good research talk: https://simon.peytonjones.org/great-research-talk/
